# Efficient Learning of HMM Parameters for Disease Progression Modeling and Intervention Planning

Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) have been used in the past for disease progression modeling, due to their capability of handling the complexities of real-world healthcare data. In this project, we present modified HMM models that naturally incorporate the effect of interventions on disease progression and allow for further intervention planning. In particular, our models have one hidden layer, which corresponds to unobserved health states. Moreover, we have a physician observation layer that is linked to the hidden layer via a certain distribution function (e.g. binomial or Normal). Finally, there are intervention variables on top of the physician observation variables that also influence the transition rates in the next time period via parameterization of either the transition probability matrix (for the discrete case) or the generator matrix (for the continuous case) of the HMM.

We develop Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithms for learning the model parameters. We consider a discrete-time as well as a continuous-time version of our model. For the first model, we follow the Monte-Carlo Expectation Maximization (MCEM) approach and show that a Gibbs sampling strategy can be used for generating samples from the entire graphical model. We then approximate the conditional expectations that are required for completing the E-step by their sample averages. For the continuous-time case, the MCEM algorithm poses computational challenges for real-world sample sizes. Therefore, we build our framework based on a recently proposed method for evaluating end state-conditioned expectations [Liu et al. 2015] and develop a forward-backward algorithm for calculating the posterior probability of the latent variable. We evaluate the validity of our algorithms by experimenting on synthetically generated datasets.

### References:

Liu, Yu-Ying, Shuang Li, Fuxin Li, Le Song, and James M. Rehg. "Efficient learning of continuous-time hidden markov models for disease progression." Advances in neural information processing systems 28 (2015).
